# Quick Start Guide

## Basic Intro

>  **PLEASE BE REMINDED THAT DUST IS CURRENTLY AT A VERY EARLY VERSION AND NOT PRODUCTION READY.**
>
> However, we are looking for teams that are interested in building `dust` with us. If you plan to use `dust` for your work, drop us an email and we will address your problems with a high priority. 

Firstly, thanks so much for checking `dust` out. `dust` is a synchonisable local-first graph database and state management solution built by Flutter developers for Flutter developers. It was originally called `Qinhuai`, which, like `Isar`, is a beautiful river in the city that our CTO Bridgecat and I are from. However, we realised that it is very hard for westerners to pronounce the name `Qinhuai`, so we later changed the name to `dust`, which simply stands for `dart` and `rust`. While `dust` is primarily built for Dart/Flutter developers (for now), the core layer of the application is written in `rust`, hence the name. Alright, now that the important issue has been cleared, let's hop right in!

## Installation

- [ ] TODO 

## Build a Todo list app with `dust`

### Define a Model

`dust`'s API is heavily inspired by `freezed`, the package that we as Flutter developers love dearly for handling data classes and unions. For demo purposes, let's assume that we are building a todo-list app. (Hey, who doesn't like todo lists?)

```dart
import 'package:dust/dust.dart';

part 'todo.dust.dart';

@Model()
class Todo with _$Todo {
  Todo._();
  
  factory Todo({
    required String name,
    String? description,
    @DustDft(false) bool isCompleted,
  }) = _Todo;
}
```

Then, run code generation with `build_runner`, and your model has been set!

```sh
dart run build_runner build --delete-conflicting-outputs
```

### Register the repository

The code shown above will generate an additional class named `$TodoRepository`. The `$` prefix is used to signify that it is generated code. For `dust` to work, you will need to register the `$TodoRepository` with dust. 

```dart
Future<void> main() async {
	final docsDir = await getApplicationDocumentsDirectory(); 
  final dataPath = p.join(docsDir.path, 'data.dust');
  Store.open(docsDir, [
    const $TodoRepository(),
  ]);
  // ... other code
}
```

Now you are all set!

### CRUD Operations

If you want to create a Todo, simply do as follows:

```dart
final todo = Todo(name: 'Write dust docs');
```

If you want to read a Todo, do as follows:

```dart
final todo = const $TodoRepository().get(todo.id);
```

If you want to update a Todo, simply do as follows:

```dart
todo.description = 'It is so hard to document code.';
```

If you want to delete a Todo:

```dart
todo.delete();
```

If you want to query all the todos:

```dart
final todos = const $TodoRepository().all();
```

Look at the API above, and you will notice a few interesting things:

- You don't have to worry about anything related to saving the data to the database. Dust handles them for you. You just need to focus on creating the model, using it, and deleting it when you need to. 
- There is no `async/await`. Would it cause user-perceived lagg? We think no. Native software generally do not deal with huge amounts of data, and modern databases are generally able to answer to these queries at a very fast pace. 
- We have yet to get to the network layer implementation yet, but the data would even be automatically synchronised for once we get our hands to it! 

### Links

```dart
for (final todo in todo.tags) {
  // do something
}

for (final todo in todo.tags.obs(o)) {
  // to something
}
```

### State Management





## Current API

```dart
class Todo with _$Todo {
  Todo._();
  
  factory Todo({required String name}) = _Todo;
}
```

In Generated Code (Besides Repository)

```dart
mixin _$Todo {
  Atom<String> get name$;
	
  @pragma("vm:prefer-inline")
  String get name => name$.get(null);
  
  @pragma("vm:prefer-inline")
  set name(String val) => name$.set(val);
}

class _Todo {
  // ...
}
```

|          | Opt-in Observability                               | Opt-in Non-observable        |
| -------- | -------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------- |
| Benefits | Saves user typing<br />Compatibility with Dart API | User won't forget to observe |

These two things conflict in an important way because choosing one over another would cause **breaking changes**. If we want to provide opt-in observability, then we need a naming scheme such that the name of the non-observable fields and the observable fields do not collide, and we leave the more ergonomic naming to the non-observable fields. The way that I have chosen currently is `todo.name` for normal getters (forwarding to `.get(null)`), and `todo.name$` for the observable fields. 

If we want to have `opt-in` non-observable, it then makes no sense forcing the postfix `$` on the field variable generated, and we would not be able to create `opt-in` observability (getter fields) without breaking changes or giving them ugly apis. 

Another thing worth considering

```dart
// ✅ list compatible
final tags = todo.tags$; // tags = todo.tags; 
tags.add(Tag(name: 'hello world'));

// ❌ list non-compatible
final tags = todo.tags$.get(null);
tags.add(Tag(name: 'hello world')); // this would not trigger an update of the tags
```





